The following article is comprised of exerpts from the IAPA's document 'SILICA IN THE WORKPLACE' and may not be reproduced in any form without permission. Sections not relevant to potters and ceramic artists have been removed from the original document. The article is indicative of the health hazards os silica in the studio, however does not constitute a definitve MSDS on the dangers of silca and other clay dusts. For more information on the dangers od Silica in the workplace, pleae refer to the IASA's original document at ...
© INDUSTRIAL ACCIDENT PREVENTION ASSOCIATION, Toronto, Canada, 2003. All rights reserved. Highlighting and italics by the editor.


What is Silica? 

Silica is the name of a group of minerals that contain silicon and oxygen in chemical combination and 
have the general formula Si02. Silica may be free, in which case only Si02 is present, or combined, in 
which the Si02 is combined chemically to some other atom or molecule. This difference is important to 
recognize, since the silica problem exists only with free silica. Labels on packages and product analysis 
sheets must be read carefully for this reason. Free silica may occur as amorphous free silica, of which 
there are many forms, and crystalline free silica, of which there are five principal forms. Certain materials 
contain both amorphous and crystalline free silica. Silica-related diseases are associated only with 
crystalline free silica. The most common examples of crystalline free silica are beach or bank sands. A 
third form of free silica is fused silica, which is produced by heating either the amorphous or crystalline 
forms (i.e. any dust from fired work! ed.). Heating amorphous silica causes conversion to the crystalline form under appropriate conditions. 
Dusts containing more than 1% crystalline free silica by weight are considered to pose a potential 
exposure hazard. 
  

Some Sources of Exposure to Crystalline Free Silica 

  hardrock mining 
  granite quarrying 
  aggregate quarrying 
  quarrying of semi-precious stones 
  ferrous and nonferrous metal casting 
  pottery manufacturing 
  porcelain manufacturing 
  enamelware manufacturing 
  abrasive products manufacturing 
  polishing semi-precious stones 
  asbestos-cement products manufacturing 
  abrasive blasting and grinding 
  refractory products manufacturing and 
utilization 
  cement products manufacturing 

 
What Are The Effects Of Exposure To Respirable Crystalline Silica?

Exposure to silica can cause silicosis which is, in fact, the most significant lung disease caused by 
breathing mineral dusts. Development of silicosis is influenced by several factors, which include: 
  amount and kind of dust inhaled 
  content of crystalline free silica in the dust 
  form of the silica 
  relative size of the inhaled particles 
  length of exposure 
  individual resistance 
  smoking habits 
  disease status 
  age of worker 

Silicosis is the result of the body's response to the presence of silica dust in the lung. The respirable 
fraction of the dust, particles generally considered to be smaller than 5µm (millionth of a metre), can 
penetrate to the innermost reaches of the respiratory tract. These are the alveoli or air sacs where 
exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide occurs. Dust particles, which land on these surfaces, are 
removed by white blood cells known as macrophages. Particles of free crystalline silica cause the 
macrophages to break open. The result is the formation of a scar like patch on the surface of the 
alveolus. Formation of large numbers of "scars" following prolonged exposure causes the alveolar surface 
to become less elastic. This reduces the transfer of gases. This is noticed as shortness of breath 
following exertion. Symptoms seldom develop in less than five years and in many cases may take more 
than 20 years to become disabling. 

Doctors consider silicosis to develop in three stages. In the first stage, no disability occurs. However, the 
disease is detectable on chest X-ray plates as shadows. During the second stage, laboured breathing 
may occur during heavy exercise or a dry cough may be present. Breathing usually becomes severely 
impaired during the third stage. As a result, the heart may enlarge to compensate. The victim becomes 
susceptible to other lung diseases such as tuberculosis.

How Can Exposure to Crystalline Free Silica be Controlled? 

Silicosis is a preventable occupational disease. 

Process selection and layout can significantly affect the production of silica-containing dusts. 
Attention to the mechanics of silica handling can lead to the selection of processes least likely to 
generate dust, and of workplace layouts which minimize the spread of dust. These considerations are 
best addressed during the design stages. 
 
The most common modification of existing processes is isolation. Sources of silica dust can 
sometimes be isolated from workplace air by enclosing the equipment or by separating it from 
workers by barriers or walls. Sometimes special booths may be used to isolate the worker from the 
source of silica dust. 

Ventilation of the workplace is essential to maintaining acceptable conditions of exposure. Workplace 
ventilation may be provided in two ways: natural or mechanical ventilation. 
Natural ventilation relies on the principle that heated air expands and rises. Natural airflow in a 
building can be obtained by providing openings at floor level and roof level. This type of ventilation is 
most effective when the openings are as far apart vertically as possible and the inlet and outlet areas 
are equal.
 
Mechanical ventilation is provided by fans. This may be required when natural ventilation is 
inadequate. Exhaust fans located at roof level may supplement natural ventilation in controlling dust 
generated by process emissions. 

Potters and ceramic artists should ensure that they wear a good face mask equipped with dust filters whenever they are handling raw materials, e.g. when mixing clays or glazes or in any other situation where dust may be created in the studio 9e.g. when fettling). (ed.)
 

All areas of the plant (or studio, ed.) should be kept clean and free from settled dust. This is a difficult task in 
situations in which dusty materials are being handled continually. Settled dust contains material, 
which given appropriate conditions such as vibration or other mechanical disturbance, can become 
airborne. 

Procedures for removing settled dust must be reviewed carefully to ensure that they do not contribute 
Vacuum cleaning equipment should be fitted with HEPA (High Efficiency Particulate Air) filters to 
ensure that respirable particles are not blown into the workplace air through the exhaust of the 
vacuum system.
 
Housekeeping procedures should be scheduled for both routine and non-routine occurrences. Spilled 
material likely to contain crystalline free silica should be collected promptly and the cause 
investigated. A central vacuum system is ideal for this purpose. 
Wet sweeping should be undertaken only if water is compatible with other materials likely to be 
to the dust problem. In general, the following practices are recommended: 
  vacuum cleaning 
  wet sweeping (if compatible with other constituents in the dust) 
  no dry sweeping 
  no air blowing 
present in the area. 

Dust-laden clothing is likely to be a source of continuing exposure following motions which cause the 
dust to become resuspended. Loose dust can be easily removed from clothing or skin by use of a 
vacuum cleaning system. The use of compressed air to blow dust from skin or clothing must be 
prohibited. A policy regarding removal of work clothing from the workplace must be considered in light 
of the potential presence of other toxic materials in the dust. 

Skin contamination by dusts containing crystalline free silica is not considered to pose a serious route 
of exposure. Washing facilities must be provided and used in consideration of other toxic materials 
which may be present in dusts which contaminate the skin. Employees should be encouraged to 
wash their hands and arms before eating, drinking, smoking or leaving the workplace. In some cases, 
employees may be required to shower before leaving the workplace. 
 
Consumption of food and beverages and smoking in the working area should be prohibited. The 
severity of response to exposure to crystalline free silica is affected by smoking. While ingestion is not 
considered a credible route of exposure, ingestion may be an important consideration in exposure to 
other toxic agents, which may be present in the dust. Eating, drinking or smoking when one is 
exposed to toxic materials can provide an important route of exposure. 
Specially designated eating and drinking areas, remote from the workplace, should be provided. 
Smoking, if permitted in the workplace, must be allowed only in the designated smoking areas 
established in accordance with the Smoking in the Workplace Act. 

Particulate materials possibly containing silica adhere to both clothing and exposed skin as a result of 
daily activities. While inhalation is the only plausible route of exposure to crystalline free silica, dust 
adhering to clothing can cause exposure due to resuspension.